[dramatic music]
(cheering)
MATT: Okay, that was a lot.
(laughter)
MATT: Wow. And they're still coming in! Okay.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Roll for composure!
MATT: Oh, that was a one, my friend.
(laughter)
MATT: But that's usual for me. I have disadvantage
on most composure rolls. (laughs) Or social
interaction. Anyway. Oh, they're still coming in.
I guess we'll patiently wait and quietly stare as
everyone enters.
(laughter)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: As everybody turns to look.
MATT: Find your seats.
(laughter)
MATT: Good job.
MATT: We still coming? We still got more line?
Yeah, we do. Okay.
(cheering, chatter)
MODERATOR: Hey, guys, we have a lot of people in
here, so after the panel today, he's not going to
be able to stay and do any autographs. You guys
can see him tomorrow, I believe?
MATT: Yes. I have... tomorrow... at a time.
AUDIENCE: 2:30!
MATT: That one.
MODERATOR: 2:30. His autograph session will be
tomorrow at 2:30, so we've got to get you guys as
quickly out as possible, and, guys, enjoy.
(cheering)
MATT: So welcome, everyone, to a panel titled
"Critical Role, RPGs, and Tabletop Renaissance".
Thank you so much for coming. My name is Matthew
Mercer. I'm a voice actor from Los Angeles and--
(cheering)
MATT: --and I appreciate that I can tell the
Keyleth cosplays from the antlers in the audience.
(laughs) Yes! But yeah, I also am Dungeon Master
for a show called Critical Role. Who here--
(cheering)
MATT: Raise your hand if you don't know what
Critical Role is. Oh, you're going to be really
confused. Let's try and do this. So. Critical Role
is a Twitch stream that began two years ago, where
I run a bunch of other friends of mine, who are
also voice actors, through a game of Dungeons
and Dragons weekly. Mostly weekly. As often as we
can. Sometimes you've got to take breaks, or we'll
die. But yeah, so that's generally it. We're just
playing Dungeons and Dragons, and it was something
we thought might be cool when we were asked to do it,
and a lot of people happened to also want to watch.
(cheering)
MATT: And not just watch, but play their own
adventures. That's kind of the cool thing.
(cheering)
MATT: I will say, and I've had a lot of
conversations about this, in like interviews or
philosophical discussions with Matt Colville or
Perkins and different people about what it is about D&D and
tabletop streaming that makes it so interesting.
For me, there's not a lot of media out there that
empowers the viewer when they're inspired to go
ahead and do the same thing immediately. You know,
you can grow up watching films and cartoons and be
like, "I want to do that," and you can, you just
have to go to school for many, many years, and
then build up a resume and try and make work for
it, and spend countless hours trying to work on an
independent project yourself, and that's really
cool, but I'd say it's a big investment to get
there. Tabletop roleplaying, if you watch it and
you're inspired to do it, you can buy a book
tomorrow, get some friends together, and have the
same exact experience in your own living room.
Nothing excites me more than going and seeing
people who either hadn't played in ten, 15 years
who then would message us on Twitter with pictures
of their game group that they just got together
for the first time in who knows how long, or
families that are playing D&D together on the
weekends, now. It's become their family game night
and a wonderful bonding experience for them. Or a
bunch of younger teens who missed the whole RPG
generation and never had really an opportunity to
see how to play an RPG and how thrilling and
wonderful it can be, learned through all these
different streams online that, "Oh, I can totally
"do that!" And then go and do so. So I'm really
excited and proud and overwhelmed of the response
to ours, let alone the entire community of
wonderful RPG streamers out there. So I'm excited
and I'm standing now in front of a room of people
who are here for that reason, and that blows my mind.
(cheering)
MATT: So. As a heads-up, too, we're going to do
our best to not spoil anything tonight, so when we
get to a Q&A portion tonight, let's try and be
respectful of people that aren't caught up,
especially some revelations in the most recent
100th episode. Try our best. Which, by the way,
100 episodes. What?!
(cheering)
MATT: That's crazy! Man. Like, if you guys aren't
sick of me by now, I guess at this point we're
cool, then. Because, you guys, that's a lot of time
looking at my face. Even Marisha's like, "I've got
"to take a break," so you guys... well done. Oh,
you too. So yeah, no. It's been a wild ride. I owe
so much to roleplaying games, both JRPG, video
game RPGs, and tabletop roleplaying games. They're
the type of storytelling that let me know who I
want to be, you know? Through sitting with books,
growing up reading fantasy novels and fiction
novels based in sci-fi universes: Arthur C.
Clarke, Isaac Asimov, Piers Anthony, Tolkien. I
was raised by stories and other storytellers. It's
those heroic stories, trials and tribulations and
battling against adversity and knowing what's
right for you in standing up for that in the face
of people telling you otherwise. Those are the
stories that teach us that it's important to rise
up to protect yourself, to protect your friends
and the ideals, philosophies, and notions that you
hold dear to yourself, while also being open to
conversation about different ideas. There's this
very heavily entrenched idea-- in modern culture
especially-- modern political culture, just
general culture, that if you have different ideas
to the other person, you can't talk about it. We
disagree, therefore there is no conversation. And
I think that doesn't get us anywhere, and I think
a lot of these stories, a lot of these tales that
many of us create ourselves or grew up watching,
whether it be film or television, cartoon, teach
us different perspectives and that each person,
while they may disagree on certain things, what's
honest and truth to you-- if anything is different
from the truth of them doesn't mean that it's
necessarily right or wrong. It's that conversation
that you have to have to come to an understanding
and realize you really don't have that much
different. Whether it be religion-based, whether
it be cultural-based, whether it be interests,
where you grew up, where you live now, where your
family's from. Any of that, you know? Whether it
be skin tone, sexuality. All of that is all just
human beings trying to find happiness, and the
basis of everything that we do on a day-to-day
basis, we're just trying to be happy and make
others happy. And to me storytelling is one of the
most positive and inspirational ways that you can
bring people together regardless of your past and
walks of life, and become closer friends and enjoy
each other's company and become more empathic to
each other, and learn more about other
perspectives in life. It's a wonderful, healthy
experience, and if you haven't had the opportunity
to sit down at a table and roll some dice and just
create an improvised story with friends, or find
new friends through that process, I highly
recommend it. There are a number of wonderful
people that volunteer at every convention to run
gaming groups, and to Dungeon Master or Game
Master games at various events. And if you haven't
had the chance, and you have a free evening, look
it up. Give it a shot. You'd be surprised how
wonderful and welcoming these people are. You
think anime conventions are welcoming? Let your
freak flag fly? The tabletop community's been
doing this for 34 years!
(cheering)
MATT: So take that jump. And it may take you a
while to find the right group, 'cause, you know,
different people do have different perspectives,
and that's not a bad thing. Some gaming group you
might go to might be very, very hardcore heavy,
intense roleplaying, and you're like, "I want more
of a casual gaming
roll-dice-and-kill-things-take-loot experience.
And that's cool. Just make sure that you express
that at the very beginning so you can decide
whether or not it's the type of game for you, and
you don't have to cause any negative emotions. And
conversely, if you still want to play together
even though you have these different ideas, talk
to your Dungeon Master or Game Master about trying
to facilitate a story that gives you a little bit
of both. You may end up finding yourself pulled
out of your comfort zone and end up enjoying that
part of the roleplaying game you didn't think you
did. If you're like, "No, I just want to min-max
"my characters and defeat demons and see how much
experience points I can get," if you allow
yourself to maybe step into that discomfort of
roleplaying and maybe coming up with a character
voice or, at the very least, talking in character,
it may feel a little weird at first, but you might
be surprised at how much you enjoy it. Conversely,
if you're heavy into community theater and you're
like, "I love D&D because of the drama." And you
show up to a table that are like, "That's cool,
"man, roll your attack." Don't be afraid to embrace
the ruleset either. And one thing I want to
express here is, every Dungeon Master, Game
Master, has their own specific, unique style,
you can't expect one table to be like the other. I
want to try and get this across as much as I can.
I'm so happy that Critical Role has found such a
great community, and people seem to resonate with
our storytelling, but I'm also a very different
Dungeon Master than everyone out there. And I
don't want anybody to go to a table and expect
what I provide at anybody else's game. They'll
provide some things that may not be quite what I
do, or not quite as good as I do, and they'll
provide some things that are far better than
I provide. Every person has their strengths and
weaknesses. I'm very heavy narrative, I'm very
heavy into the intense roleplaying circumstances
and the actor-driven character breakdowns and
existential crisis that is human existence...
while also killing shit every now and then. Other
tables-- I try and play the rules as well as I
can, but also, I mess up the rules every now and
then, as I'm sure you've seen Twitch chat mention.
(laughter)
MATT: But that's part of the fun, too. There are
people that are much better at keeping a cohesive
ruleset, or running a very open-ended sandbox,
political-based, driving outside of the story
campaign, and I don't know how to do that. I
couldn't if I wanted to. But those games are
magnificent and incredible for their own right,
too. So, you know, I guess what I want to say is
if you go into a table, go in with as little
expectation as you can, embrace and enjoy what's
being provided there, and do your best to try and
take it for that. Because one, we don't need any
more pressure on GMs out there to try and be
something they're not. It's already a big
undertaking; it's a heavy task to run a story for
a party, but it's also one of the most rewarding
out there, as long as the players are able to
appreciate and express that appreciation for the
time and energy that the GM has put into it.
Anyway. Tangent. Hi.
(laughter)
MATT: I did get a full night's sleep last night.
(cheering)
MATT: The first in probably three to four weeks.
Between MomoCon and the Tomb of Annihilation
reveal stream the weekend before that, and then--
it's been a month. But it's been a good month.
It's been a very good month. Now we're rolling
into Anime Expo/Comic Con/Gen Con. Gen Con. Gen
Con! I'm so excited. It's their 50th anniversary.
50 years since Gen Con's been around as a gaming
convention. That's crazy. A
gaming-fantasy-sci-fi-- it's just a genre
convention that is-- it was one of my bucket list
things for years and years and years. I got to go
for the first time last year, and it was-- you
could hear the Dance of the Sugarplum Fairies
playing as I danced around, like-- Steve Jackson
Games! Carcathon! It was really exciting. If you
have the opportunity ever to go to Gen Con, you
will game the whole weekend. It's going to be
amazing. But this year, we're launching the--
releasing the first Exandria campaign guide.
(cheering)
MATT: Thank you. I hope you like it. I've never
written anything like this before. It was an
undertaking. It wasn't something I wanted to do,
originally. When Green Ronin contacted me about a
year and a half ago, they were like, "Hey, would
you be interested in doing this?" I was like, "Um.
"I mean. Sure? What do I-- Oh, no. I signed a
contract. Now I've got to do this." So I had to go
through all my old notes and extrapolate on things
that had been forgotten or put to the wayside;
things that the players had never actually
discovered, you know, side quests and story
elements that got bypassed and forgotten, because
that's how D&D works. But I got to go ahead and
flesh those out and put them into a book, and had
to fill out the rest of the territory and put my
thoughts on a page and then think about it and
write it in a way where somebody else could
actually comprehend what the hell I'm talking
about. So it's been a very, very unique process,
and I'm really excited, and I hope people like it.
I mean, it's hard to look at that compared to all the
main published settings out there. I grew up
reading the Eberron, Forgotten Realms,
Dragonlance, Greyhawk, all these classic-- Dark
Sun! They're all so amazing and unique, and my
world started without the intent of becoming a
setting. I was literally just doing a vanilla
fantasy made-up world for my friends who had never
played D&D before, so it's been a very unique
challenge to try and find how it can stand unique
against other settings while still staying true to
how we built it naturally over the past four or
five years, and throw a couple fun surprises in
there. Like, it made me think about a calendar.
How many days are there in an Exandrian year?
Okay. And now there's 11 months. What are they
called and why? Okay, they have holidays. Oh man.
So yeah. It's been a very, very unique-- very
unique process. So I hope you enjoy it. What else
is coming up? We had our 100th episode, we
announced-- well, we announced we're
putting everything in a podcast form now, which is
great.
(cheering)
MATT: Took long enough.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Thank you!
MATT: Oh, you're welcome. We've been wanting it
for a long time, and it's always been one of
those, "Eh, it's too hard. It's a lot of content."
And then some people higher up in Legendary
changed over and the new people, we're like, "Can
we do a podcast?" They're like, "Oh yeah, sure."
(laughter)
MATT: Okay! So really glad we're going to get that
out to you guys. We have a month or so and we'll
start doing the full rollout, the releasing of episodes
until we're caught up and have it out there. So
those who have like, "I'd like to dive into
Critical Role, but the videos eat too much data on
"my plan when I'm out driving," you can now
download it as a podcast.
(cheering)
MATT: And we're going to have some other cool
announcements in the coming weeks, which, things
that we were hoping to announce on the 100th, but
things had to fall into place right, so we have a
couple fun things scattered throughout the next
few weeks or so, so keep an ear out. Anyway. I've
been talking at you for a lot, and I'm sure many
of you have some interesting and unique questions,
because I like to have more of a conversation at a
panel than just me going, "Hi, words, listen."
(laughter)
MATT: So. That being the case, I don't know what
would be the best way. How do you want to do this?
How do you want to put the mic--
(cheering)
MODERATOR: Okay, so we're going to be doing the
Q&A style. I want everyone who has a question for
Matt Mercer to come in the middle in a straight
line and I'll hand you a microphone. Once you're
done with your question, you give it to the person
behind you. Also, if you have gifts for Matt
Mercer, I will be taking them from you, and I will
put them over in this nice, pretty corner, okay?
MATT: Don't encourage it!
(laughter)
MATT: Give things to sacrifice at the altar of
dark energy. Lay them into the flames and bow.
That's what we're doing now. Into the trash fire
that I lit at the start of the panel. Yes, please.
Breathe the fumes. Ahh. All righty. Shh!
(chatter)
MATT: That would be actually some great room
walla, right there. That was some great peas and
carrots, guys, well done.
MODERATOR: Also, make sure to introduce yourself.
MATT: Yes, please! I want to know your name! Hi!
IKO: Sorry, I might cry, I thought you were a
cryptid for the longest time. Not real.
(laughter)
IKO: Hi, my name's Iko.
MATT: Hi, Iko.
IKO: Okay. I had my birthday recently--
MATT: Happy birthday!
IKO: Thank you.
(cheering)
IKO: And of course, in Critical Role tradition, I
wanted to start a DM campaign, but I also watch
Vox Machina, so what is your favorite JRPG, why,
and how did it help you become-- you don't have to
answer it all, but how did you become a better
storyteller?
MATT: Oh, man.
IKO: Yeah, right?
MATT: You're making me choose.
IKO: You asked us to!
MATT: Because I-- I'm like-- I got my Final Fantasy
VI here, and I got my Chrono Trigger here, and I
got my Suikoden I and II here. Ah, why are you
doing this to me? I'll have-- okay, no, I'll go
with probably Final Fantasy VI overall.
(cheering)
MATT: Partly because, one, when it came out it was
seriously pushing the limits of what we had seen
capable of the SNES, especially once you got your
first airship moment in-game, you're like, "What?!
"It's a 3D round world!" But the story was so rich,
the characters were so deep, and the story
respected you enough to go into some interesting,
dark adult themes that dealt with elements of loss of one's
family, of suicide-- going into a lot of really
interesting, dark places that these tiny little
16-bit characters that are maybe a collection of
40 pixels still make you cry in your room, going
like, "No, Celes, don't do it! You just need to
find healthier fish to feed to Cid until he gets
"better." That's a real part of the game. It was an
incredible story, such a wonderfully thought-out
world, and then you had a wendigo in your party,
and Gogo, whatever the hell he was. It was such a
good game, and you had the loss of Captain Leo. It
was a dark RPG compared to previous ones, so I
loved that one and it affected me profoundly when
it came out. So I'd say, in the ways it helped me
run a game, it tremendously helped me understand
that there is a lot of enjoyment in the difficulty
of adversity and overcoming it. And it also
allowed me to understand that sometimes it's okay
to have a villain that's just pure evil. I love
myself villains you can understand-- Sephiroth,
you're like, "Aw, you poor thing, you were lied to
and abused by the military-industrial complex of
"Shinryu growing up, and you're not really at fault
for how you turned out." Kefka? Oh, you're just a
dick. You're just a terrible little clown man. And
you hated him and you loved hating him. So yeah, I
learned a lot about that type of a villain
archetype, I learned about various ways to tell
elements of a dark story that can still be
compelling. Even though you're dragging your
players through the muck, they'll still thank you
and be like, "That was really impactful and helped
"me work out some things I wasn't thinking
about." You're like, "Oh, you're welcome. I'll
"bill you for the therapy later."
(laughter)
MATT: Good question.
DANIEL: Hello, I'm Daniel.
MATT: Daniel.
DANIEL: First thing I have to ask is, how are the
dice I gave you last year?
MATT: How's what?
DANIEL: How are the dice I gave you last year at
A-Kon?
MATT: Oh, I have a giant collection-- actually,
this is kind of cool. Me and Marisha have our
giant dice collection that we're throwing into
this large glass, round fishbowl kind of thing,
which is ironic now based on what happened a few
episodes ago. But-- yes! We are gods!
(laughter)
MATT: So whenever we're running a game outside of
Critical Role, like whenever we do CelebriD&D things
or run a game for Wizards, I'll go ahead and grab
a set of dice out of that, like a handful, and it
randomizes each time, so I'm always playing with
somebody else's dice that was granted in the
community when I go and play one of those events.
And they do swap out sometimes the dice I use in
the show. I have one or two dice that are
mainstays, that are kind of like my-- for lack of
a better term, my traditional--
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Fate dice?
MATT: The word I'm looking for is my superstition
dice. Like I have my one big fate die, which is
the Shapeways mine-looking one that I do for big
rolls. So I'll keep those around, but I'll swap
out every now and then so I have that constant
flow of community-given dice through my gameplay.
DANIEL: And the second main one I wanted to ask
is, when everyone rerolls everything and becomes
new characters, will you allow non-human
half-elves, such as half-elf, half-dragons? Or
such as half-elf, half-werewolves? Or such as
half-elf, half-celestials?
MATT: I mean, if the player's really driven in
that direction? We can discuss and work something
out. That's really up to the player, though. On
some degree, depending on the player, might be
like, "Ooh, I want to play a half-gelatinous cube,
half-kobold." And you're like, "Okay. Um. Keeping
"that armor on's going to be really weird. Sure."
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Sam would!
MATT: Yeah, Sam would. He'd pull it off, probably.
But yeah, I leave it up to the players. I think
some of them feel a bit of comfort in the existing
racial elements, but they've expanded since we
started this campaign with Volo's Guide to the
monstrous races, so I'm hoping to see some weird,
interesting variations there. Which, by the way,
half-elf, half-werewolf technically is full elf
with lycanthropy.
(cheering)
MATT: Depending on how you run your campaign. If
werewolf is its own race, then probably go for it.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: (inaudible)
MATT: This is true. You're right. I stand
corrected. Well done. (laughs) You're my new
redshirt guy. That's awesome. Hello, sir.
CHRIS: Hi. My name's Chris. I too have
disadvantage on social interactions and composure.
So my question is that you obviously have a little
bit of time to prepare for each episode every
week. I just want to know what kind of references
from art, media that you fall on as you're
preparing those games.
MATT: Ironic based on the question earlier, I
listen to a lot of video game soundtracks while
I'm writing. Honestly, my mainstay playlist is
a really great Chrono Trigger symphonic
soundtrack that exists out there. There's three
discs, and it's amazing. So I'll have that on
random play, and I'll throw in some Dark Souls
soundtrack stuff, I'll throw in some old Suikoden
I. A lot of nostalgic music, because to me that
brings me to a really creative place, so I'll just
have that thrown in there with-- some Super
Metroid, actually, goes in there really well, too.
Oh, Super Metroid. But yeah, so that helps me out.
As far as other media, I don't specifically look
to other forms of media to inspire me,
necessarily. If I have-- I don't want to feel too
influenced, and I've consumed so much media in the
past that I think the nostalgia factor lets me
just think back to some things that have
profoundly affected me in the past, things that
hung on. But I'm sure parts have leaned into it
here and there. Like being reminded of American
Gods, because the new show's playing now, Stars,
which is-- took a couple episodes to really get
going, and now it's so good. So yeah. Those
elements-- as that show started, I'm like, "Oh,
"we're getting into an interesting arc now." So
yeah, who knows? It's hard not to have the media
around you influence you. Everything is derivative
to a certain extent, and usually with respect and
love. Even a lot of the storylines I do, as much
as I say, "I created this story," but if you break
it down, I'm sure there's basis and influences from
three or four different things that all led to
this idea, because that's just the nature of
writing in media. Rarely is anything truly unique,
and when they do, it blows my mind. But music is a
big thing for me. Music's just always been a
creative trigger, and that helps me out
tremendously. Cool, good question. Hello!
SYDNEY: Hi. I'm Sydney.
MATT: Hi, Sydney.
SYDNEY: Of all the things I could spew out of my
mouth, I just have one thing that I can think of.
Are you a cowboy in a man costume?
MATT: Am I a what?
SYDNEY: Are you a cowboy in a man costume?
MATT: A cowboy in a man costume?
SYDNEY: Yes.
(laughter)
MATT: (McCree voice) I don't know what you're
talking about.
(cheering)
MATT: (McCree voice) But nice try. (laughs) Well
played. Hello, sir. (Gilmore voice) You're wearing
the proper t-shirt, I see.
PABLO: Thank you, thank you. I'll try to follow up
on that. My name's Pablo. The question I have was
regarding-- I guess the title of the panel is--
part of the title was "The Renaissance of Tabletop
"Gaming". I wanted to know what you think that-- if
there was a specific point or watershed moment
that you could point to and be like, "Yes, this
is when tabletop gaming came back into the public
"consciousness and it's now more acceptable," if
that's what you think?
MATT: No, no, it's a valid point. It kind of began
with 3rd Edition, because after the satanic panic
of the 80s and such, D&D and roleplaying games in
general really became a niche, basement game. Even
all the old Risk games and the early World of
Darkness, and Mutants and Superheroes and all the
different RPGs of that time, it was all very still
enclosed, don't talk about it publicly amongst
other people in the high school, dear God, don't
let them know I play D&D. That type of an era. 3rd
Edition came out, and it was a little more
accessible, it brought the community back. The
main community. But as far as a major social
rediscovery of the game, I think a lot of it has
to do, in a weird way-- and one of the early
triggers, I think, was Vin Diesel. When you have a
man who is on such an international level of
stardom that everybody knows him, and then
suddenly word comes out that he plays D&D, and
they start asking him this question at different
celebrity events, and he starts talking about it
in a non-shameful way? When he's like, "Yeah, I
"play D&D! It's great! Yeah, I have my character's
name tattooed on my side, yeah, he's named Melkor
"because I love Tolkein, what? I'm Vin Diesel." That was a
huge step, because all of a sudden people were
like, "Whoa, Vin Diesel plays D&D? I mean, anybody can
play D&D then." And then we have Stephen Colbert
being so out and loud about his Tolkein obsession.
And it's just become this slow-rolling social
acceptance of, "Oh, well, if these cool people
play it, it can't be that bad." So that began it a
little bit. Then I think Acquisitions Inc. helped
tremendously; a lot of the PAX games they would
run, because they brought in some celebrity
talent, which brought some more. When I say celebrity
talent, I mean like Patrick Rothfuss, a very, very
well-established writer. Yeah, the PVP guys. Wil.
All these different people that began to just generate this
momentum for the community to rally more in a
media way. And then you have the Roleplay Guys,
with JP and Adam Koebel and Steve Lumpkin, all
these guys that ran these great online games and
began to build more and more of this community of
people that can see people playing and enjoying
the game if they didn't have a frame of reference.
And then when Twitch emerged, it was a platform
that allowed us to do it live, and allowed us to
do it uncut, unedited, just raw and
in-the-moment, and that was really the reason we
started streaming our game. There wasn't a-- we
didn't want it refilmed and released and edited.
We didn't want it to be this presentory form. We
wanted to just play our game, and if there were
cameras there, then let it be. And I think that
resonated, because it felt like you were just
peeking in on somebody's game, and you were kind
of invited to the table. And so as those streams
began to become more and more prominent, it
allowed, one, people who used to play and then had
families and kids and jobs and didn't have the
time to do it anymore, an outlet to play
vicariously through these streams and get excited
again about a hobby that meant a lot to them when
they were growing up, or remind them how much they
enjoyed it so they can get back in contact with
their old friends and start playing again, or a
younger generation that never had an opportunity
to really be exposed to this that are now seeing
it for the first time and going, "Oh, that looks
"like a lot of fun and very different than the
video games I play online. Let me try this." And
as such, we have this amazing community that
continues to spread. So I think a lot of it has to
do with all those predecessors that kind of paved
the way, and then now, thanks to streaming, it's
allowed a lot more people to see it and connect
it. So many people have come to me and said, "I
"didn't even know what D&D was or how it worked
until I saw your show, and I'm like, 'Oh, I can do
"'that!'" And I'm like, "That's why I started doing
it. That's exactly why." Because I wanted people
to look at it and go, "Oh. I can do that. I want
to go do that with my friends. I want to go do
"that with my friends!" So for what small part we've
played, we're super proud and excited that it's
become this renaissance, and we're a small of a
large part, and that involves you guys. We're
nothing without you guys. You community build
everything. You've become more important about the
show than we have. Legitimately. Because you all
support each other so much, because you guys are
so great at helping each other out, and signal
boosting when someone in the community needs help
or needs assurance, and running games for people
that can't find other players in their vicinity,
and when times are hard on a global scale, on a
micro-, local scale just making sure that everyone knows
that we have a community of Critters around. So
you guys really are the reason that this shit is
working and becoming so prominent. So thank you,
tremendously.
(cheering)
MATT: And hello!
JOCELYN: Hi! It's been a while. I don't know why,
but I'm feeling as excited-slash-nervous as when I
met you a year ago.
MATT: Good.
(laughter)
JOCELYN: Well, that's good. Anyway, hi, I'm
Jocelyn. You remember me. I did mention a
surprise. She managed to get it, and hopefully
you'll see it later.
MATT: Oh, okay. Thank you. Does it detonate?
JOCELYN: No, but--
MATT: Just making sure.
JOCELYN: It's nice of you to mention your dice,
because you might be adding to it? Except in more
ways than one with those. For you and Marisha.
It's an engagement gift.
MATT: Oh, thank you!
(awws, cheering)
JOCELYN: My boyfriend and I actually found them at
our local game store near my house, and once I saw
them, bam, "Matt and Marisha need these."
MATT: Thank you, I appreciate that.
JOCELYN: Anyway. Good God. I have three questions
running around in my head, but I'll stick to one.
What was your favorite comedic moment from when
you played in the most recent one-shot that Liam
was running?
MATT: Oh, man. For those who don't know, Liam
O'Brien, one of our players, another voice actor,
he ran a one-shot for all of us where we all woke
up as ourselves, but children. Very Stranger
Things-style. And it had some wonderful comedic
moments, some really dark moments, some really
heartfelt moments. It was wonderful. I think my
favorite comedic moment is the fact that Travis
Willingham just runs from everything. Like, as a
guy who, in his adult years, 6'4", built like a
truck, plays Grog, a barbarian that just runs
screaming into battle, ready to shed blood, plays
himself as a child and every encounter he's like,
"I turn around and run. I run as fast as I can."
And then watching Laura be like, "What are you
doing?! It's attacking me!" He's like, "I don't care."
(laughter)
MATT: So I'd probably have to go with that. Or, as
part of the encounter, we ended up on the
soundstage with Neil-- he's the director of Last
of Us and Uncharted 4-- as kind of an inside joke,
and in the battle, as the electronics went crazy
and ended up murdering people, ended up killing
Neil, and then as we were leaving the room, Sam
goes up and drops his headshot and resume and
goes, "By way, if you're ever looking to cast
again, let somebody know, I'd love to work with
"you." That was a pretty great moment, too. Thank
you! Hi!
DELPHINE: Hi! I'm Delphine. First of all, really
quick shout-out to my friend who's dressed up as Victor.
(cheering)
MATT: Yes, I saw you earlier! (Victor voice) It's
good coffee!
(laughter)
MATT: I love it. We all will learn from your
mistakes, Victor.
DELPHINE: My question is less about gaming and
more of a personal thing. I know you've been to
Australia, and I was wondering if you had a
favorite place to travel or any fun traveling stories?
MATT: Oh man. I mean, I love to travel in general,
because you get the opportunity to meet people from
different cultures and learn about history from
different places in the world. We're Americans.
We're one of the youngest countries in the world,
and you're like, "Oh yeah, we have history. This
"building is 60 years old! Oh man!" Then you go to
Europe and it's like, "This one is 600 years old."
And you're like, "And it's a 7-Eleven."
(laughter)
MATT: Which happened! I was in Gothernburg, Sweden
years ago, and there was this beautiful stone
archway with a gargoyle that's a Gothic-style
structure. I walk in and it's a 7-Eleven. I'm
like, "Oh. That feels so wrong." But for me, what
I love about traveling is rediscovering that no
matter where you travel, people are really the
same. Like, people, once again, just want to be
happy. They like to meet new people, learn things,
and provide for each other, and get excited to
share their culture with you and vice-versa and
ask you about yours. No matter where you go, no
matter what your religious background is, no
matter what your family's history is, we're all so
fucking similar!
(cheering)
MATT: And it proves itself time and time and time
again. So that's my favorite part of traveling,
honestly. As far as favorite place to go? I don't
know, man, it's hard to pick. I really, really
enjoyed Ireland. Ireland felt like a fantasy
world. Everything was just green and lush and the
skies were gray and rainy. It was Matt wonderland.
And everyone sounded whimsical and drank a lot of
alcohol. Kept trying to give it to me, and I was
like, "I don't drink that much. I'll just-- okay,
"oh god. What happened to the last 12 hours?" So
Ireland was a lot of fun. Definitely. Good
question. Hello!
NICK: Hi. I'm Nick. I just recently in the past
six months started playing Dungeons & Dragons,
as both Dungeon Master--
(cheering)
NICK: As both the Dungeon Master and a player, and
I've been working with my players in both settings
to try and create narrative and story in both
environments, and I was wondering, how do you as a
Dungeon Master, with Laura and the rest of them,
create the narrative? Is it mostly they write
their backstory and you take it and run with it,
or is there more conversation that happens later as well?
MATT: It's a conversation. What usually will
happen is I'll give a little bit of the setting to
the players beforehand; I'll write up an e-mail that
talks about the general-- the landscape they're
going to be starting in, some basic information
about a few locations and some of the political
structure that exists there, any possible faction
tensions that exist, and then the players from
there will ask me a few questions about their
character idea. I'll answer those questions, then
they'll write me a character backstory based on
the information I gave them. Then, from there,
I'll talk to them and be like, "Okay, this is
really cool. This part doesn't quite work with the
"way this thing works here. Is it possible we can
change it a little bit to work this way?" And they'll
be like, "Okay, you know what? Yeah, that works
out pretty well." And so we'll have-- it's a
conversation. Because you don't necessarily want
the players to completely narrate the entire
direction of your narrative, because they want
some surprises as well, but you also don't want to
completely overtake it to where they don't feel
like their character stories are their own,
either. So for me, at least, I prefer to have a
conversation about it, a little back-and-forth,
and then you run with it.
NICK: Can I tack on to that real quick?
MATT: Real quick.
NICK: Does that conversation continue later on,
like halfway through the arc?
MATT: Yeah, it does. I'd say if the player has
anything they want to bring up, or something about
their past they've come up with an idea about they
want to convey, they'll shoot me an e-mail or a
text and be like, "Hey, I was thinking about this.
Could we incorporate something like this?" And
I'll be like, "Sure!" or like, "Eh, it might not
fit for this," or, "We've already met this
"character and it contradicts this other element of
the story," but they're welcome to do that. I know
Sam has done that a number of times, been like,
"So, I had this idea about Scanlan's thing here."
His whole year in Ank'harel was a back-and-forth
with him in a lead-up to the recent story
elements, so it's been kind of fun. But, like,
time jumps. Right before we started streaming, we
had a six-month, seven-month gap in the game's
story, in which all the players then told me what
they wanted to do over that, and adjust any
elements of their backstory or what has
transitioned in that time that would affect them
going forward. So yeah, you can find points in the
story; be open to it. Just let players know that,
you know, your word is law. (laughs) Awesome, thank you.
GABE: Hey, I'm Gabe.
MATT: Hey, what's your name? Gabe, pleasure, buddy.
GABE: Yeah, I actually just moved down here from
Pittsburgh about a year ago to Austin, Texas. I
never got to play tabletops in high school, but I
met awesome friends, and we'd play Dungeons and
Dragons, Pathfinder, this anime tabletop called
Big Eyes, Small Mouth.
MATT: Yes, I've heard of that!
GABE: So my big thing is, okay, I'm going to be a DM
this time. I want to jump into it, and so I make
ideas on the side, I'm like, I'm going to
incorporate that story into here. And I want to
get more familiar with my players' characters, and
help them with theirs, so I'm trying to prepare
ideas and questions, like, "How did you wrong
someone in the past?" or "What is your perceived
"purpose in life?" To both give me a better idea of
their character and help them get a better idea of
theirs. So what kind of questions do you think
you'd ask them?
MATT: Good question. Those are great questions to
ask, there. "Are your parents dead? Yes or no?
"Circle one." But don't leave the "no". Just leave
the "yes". Okay. Wonderful, thank you. We're going
to extend the panel 30 minutes so we can get
through the rest of you.
(cheering)
MATT: Thank you, A-Kon.
AUDIENCE: Thank you, A-Kon!
MATT: But yeah. Other questions involve, "What
deep fear drives your character? What's a major
"and secondary goal of your character at this point
in their life?" Not overall, because goals, as we
all know, change pretty quickly based on what
happens in your life. So like, at this moment,
when it starts, what's your major and secondary
goal? Asking questions about, "Do you have any
"existing prejudices against any factions in the
world? Any political figures?" Anything that you
can use to mess with them if they ever encounter this
one lord that may have wronged their family long
ago. You don't have to get too deep. A really,
really good game, for reference, that has a great
questionnaire, is the game Dread. Part of the
game's structure-- the game is built literally on
just sending a questionnaire to the players, and
then getting the answers back, and then you get to
build the narrative off that. So it's a good place
to look for reference as well.
GABE: To add to the prejudice, we have a guy whose
character only kills elves.
(laughter)
MATT: So you'd say your character would be... He
Who Hunts Elves?
(laughter)
MATT: His name is Squeegee. No wonder he hates
elves. Elves probably hate him because his name is Squeegee.
(laughter)
MATT: That's pretty awesome. Good question. Oh,
and I would also say, if you're having a hard time
getting information out of your players, if you
really want them to provide you with some
backstory-- and it happens a lot, they'll lag
behind. I had to drag information out of my
players tooth and nail to get things because they
hadn't played D&D before. Getting a backstory out
of Sam was, at the very beginning, hard.
Incentivize them. "Hey, guys, we're all starting
"at level two. However, if you send me a backstory,
you start with a bonus 500 experience points." Or,
"You start with a bonus common magical item."
Players-- you'll be surprised how quickly they'll get
you a really well-written backstory.
(laughter)
MATT: And then if they all turn it in, then, "Oh
look, you guys all started with it, so you're all
"still at the same level. There's not really a
benefit to it." I mean, there is a benefit, but
there is no-- "Ha-hah! I have one more item than
the rest of you because I did my homework." Yeah,
small incentives can be a really good way to try
and help goad your players to take the time and
think. Because even if they don't write a
backstory, some people who don't have a lot of
roleplaying experience might have a hard time
finding how to get into character. And just
sitting down and thinking about a backstory,
thinking about a character's motivation, and
writing just a page of information about that
character, is an exercise in character-building,
that when they do go to the game, they'll have a
much stronger connection with this character and a
much easier way of stepping into their shoes and
thinking how they think. So I recommend it if you
have the opportunity. Even if it's just a small
bit of information. If that's the kind of game you
want to run. Hello, sir!
CHRIS: Hello, father.
(laughter)
MATT: Well-played.
CHRIS: Seriously, though. My name is Chris. Good
to have you again this year at A-Kon. My question
is this: I want you to name your top three
hilarious moments-- not "We are gods," because
that was most recent, because we all know that
one-- but try to name your top three most
hilarious moments from the top of your head, if
you can, from Critical Role.
MATT: From Critical Role, oh, man.
AUDIENCE: Cows.
MATT: The cow-mouflage moment was pretty
great.
(cheering)
MATT: Like, with the right combination of spells
in D&D, it gets weird real fast. So having a bunch
of people with the-- what the fuck's the name of
the spell called again? Seeming! I'm like, it's
not Sending, that's a different spell. With the
Seeming spell, turning them all into illusory
cows, and then flight spell to chase after a roc,
so you have a bunch of flying cows of different
sizes just coasting across the moonlight like some
weird E.T. parody was pretty great. I mean, any
time Sam kills somebody with Vicious Mockery is
pretty great. One of my favorite moments of the
game still was early in the series, when they were
attacking the Emberhold, and they were trying to
do it stealthily, and all of a sudden, Sam grabs
Pike and they Dimension Door up to the top of the
hold, where there are a couple of these duergar
that are watching guard. And I think he does a
Thunderwave spell or something that knocks them
off the side. One of them lands into the lava
below and impacts and is screaming, and Keyleth's
right there, and she goes, "No, no! Shh, shh." And
uses her wind to push him faster into the lava as
he's screaming. He's like, (screams). She's like,
"No, no, I'm so sorry, I'm so sorry, shh, shh."
(laughter)
MATT: It was such a horrible, wonderful
quintessential Keyleth moment. It was beautiful.
And, really, any time Grog decides to handle the
negotiation of any purchase. A man who relishes in
having terrible math skills and ends up walking
back with less items and less money is a
wonderful, wonderful experience. Good question,
thank you. You, sir.
MAC: Hi, sir. My name is Mac.
MATT: Hey, Mac.
MAC: I was going to congratulate you on your 100th
episode, but as an insomniac, I think I'll just
congratulate you on a full night of sleep.
MATT: (laughs) Thank you. Very appreciated.
MAC: You have expressed some frustration with your
players because you're a human being and they are
them. So, with this being the last arc-- I don't
think that's too spoilery. I was wondering if
there's some things you're looking forward to
being gotten rid of, whether it's bartering over
Druidcraft or some random item that has the word
"hand cone" in it. Anything you'll be glad to see
the last of, because it can't all be good.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Things that DMs have the list for
when changing.
MATT: You know, here's the thing: you can totally
tweak anything you put in your game you think is
overbalanced. And things that are super
overbalanced I'll tweak a little bit. There's
certain items that have been around for a very
long time that might rhyme with Boots of Paste
that could probably use a tweak. However, they've
been used so long for a certain way that it's my
fault for not thinking ahead of that or understanding
the rule system at the time well enough when I
designed it. So I'm letting it stand. However,
when the campaign's over, all those items are
wiped away and everything's going to be new and
fresh and better-balanced.
(laughter)
MATT: So, to quote Victor, (Victor voice) learn
from my mistakes!
(cheering)
MATT: And that's the thing about the show.
Critical Role, it's not a paragon of D&D. It's not
an incredible sports-level professional-- we are
all just tumbling our way through the game at all
times. We do some things pretty well, we do some
things okay, and we do some things really poorly,
and that's any D&D game. We're not trying to
represent the best version of it. We're just
playing our game and hoping that you'll watch and
embrace the things that happen really well and
notice the things that don't go very well and be
like, "Cool, avoid that in the future when I run
"my games," you know? And that's the best I could
hope for. So that's a good example. As far as the
last arc goes, I'm looking forward to a number of
story bits that are coming forward, and I'm
looking forward to the party realizing that agency
is going to be an important part of this arc, and
you can't take a long rest after every encounter
or you might show up to places and everything's
already happened.
(cheering)
MATT: Hello, sir.
DAVID: Hi, I'm David.
MATT: Hey, David.
DAVID: I'll keep this brief. Specifically in terms
of combat situations, how do you design each
encounter or scenario so that it's fresh and your
players never figure out your standard routine and
keep them on their toes.
MATT: That's something that even I am still
learning as we go. To me, the key to making a
unique combat encounter is, one, providing
creatures or antagonists in a scenario that have
varying abilities than what they're used to. It's
cool to occasionally throw in some creatures that
they know before, so they can use their player
knowledge to that advantage. Not every fight in
D&D is meant to be a drag-down
to-the-end-of-the-line life-or-death situation.
Otherwise boss fights aren't that impactful, and
conversely, players get tired. If every battle is
super exhausting, you're just going to wear them
out. And you want players to enjoy the fact that
they've worked hard to gain this power, and learn
these abilities, and sometimes you want to throw
them a battle that they're just going to steamroll
and be like, "Haha, I am a god damn hero!" And
you're like, "Yes, you are, good job!" Because then you
can use that hubris when they get to the next encounter.
(laughter)
MATT: So to make combat encounters interesting, if
it's a certain creature you really like but you
feel like they're missing some unique tool, like
if you have a lot of party members, add an
ability that's an AOE effect. You can change
anything that's in the books, you can alter
anything that's in the books and make it your own.
Sometimes I use creatures unchanged out of the
book, sometimes I alter them dramatically or
create new ones entirely. You have that within
your power as a Dungeon Master, because it's
whatever you want it to be. So come up with
creative ways that the enemies can attack or alter
or shift the battlefield, pushing things away,
restraining them where they stand, throwing them
up against the wall and locking them there, making
ravines or areas of the battlefield that are
themselves challenges in the terrain that not are
just pitfalls, but the enemy intelligently--
if they are an intelligent enemy-- can use to their favor.
What happens if a creature grabs a party member
and throws them off a cliff? Harpies are not that
powerful, but I added a rule to harpies in my
game-- though they've bypassed them almost every
time they've been there. High-level magic makes it
real interesting to try and do random encounters,
sometimes. But I gave the harpies an ability where
they have an attack type where they can grapple
somebody and then move them at half-speed if they
don't break the grapple. Which is really great at
mountainsides. All of a sudden, this low-hitpoint
harpy is a real issue. It's like, "Well, my only
"attack's 17 damage, but if I drop you 1,000 feet,
(chuckles). You're no longer a god."
(laughter)
MATT: Also, consider the encounter sometimes, if
there's a narrative reason for it especially, come
up with ways that there are non-combat-specific
challenges in the battlefield. Imagine a boss that
has captured a number of villagers and locked them
within a sphere of magic, and the longer they're
in there, it's draining their life force. So the
players not only have to defeat the creature, but
they have to try and find a way to take down this
sphere, and the more combat rounds that go by, the
more members of these villagers start withering and dying.
So now it's like, "Do I attack the boss or do I
"start trying to find ways to shut down this
field?" Maybe there's hidden elements of this
magical construction that they have to go and now
destroy the different parts, and they have to
choose or split up. Do you distract the boss while
we go do this, or do we not care about the
villagers and just go after the boss, but now have
to go back to town and deal with the fact that we
didn't save a lot of people? Come up with unique
ways to not just have moral quandaries, but to
challenge what they consider a combat encounter
is. Every now and then you want to have a hitpoint
just rush-in-and-kill-shit-type fight, but you
want to try and mix it up every now and then and
make them think. I can go on a long discussion
about this, and there's only so much I can even
teach on that. Matt Colville has some great videos
on YouTube you can check out. I know Adam Koebel--
Colville, Koebel, those are interesting names--
has done a lot of great games with some
interesting combat techniques. High Rollers over
in the U.K., Mark does some great stuff too. So
you can look in at some of their forums, some of
their Reddit threads and ask them on Twitter, for
some suggestions, too, and they can
probably help you out. Good! Hello!
SKY: Hi! My name's Sky.
MATT: Hey, Sky!
SKY: I'm starting a new Pathfinder campaign of my
own very soon, my first one, and I was wondering
if you had any advice for a relatively new GM who
is pretty confident in the roleplaying and story
aspect, but not so much in the balancing
encounters and either accidentally everything's a
super-easy combat encounter that they can all just
rush through, or the boss kills them all?
MATT: You learn-- I would say start easy, then
rank up. It's much better to have a party
steamroll an encounter, and then you can scale the
difficulty from experience and trial and error as
you go, than it is to have the first encounter
just wipe everyone out. And you're like, "Well,
"that was fun. Do you guys want to come back next
week? No? Okay, bye." So definitely err on
starting the easier side, and then learn from
those encounters, "Okay, that guy got killed way
"too fast, so he wasn't doing enough damage to be a
threat. Next encounter, I'll up those sets of
"elements." Or add an ability that might shut down
one of their spellcastings shortly. Or what if an
enemy has part of the terrain that drops a
portcullis and they all have crossbows? So the
party has to find a way to get past that gate
while they're being shot full of bolts that they
can't find a way to avoid. You learn from
experience. I can tell you right now, the first
three years I ran D&D out of high school, those
games were awful. It was so bad! Because I didn't
have any basis of reference. I just had the books,
and whatever I thought might work, and so we
didn't know any better, and by then we were like,
"This seems fine." Flaming room? "This is fine."
With the cup. That was my early D&D. We didn't know
any better. So don't be too worried about having
to get it right out of the gate. You'll learn,
you'll come up with some great and ingenious
moments, some things won't quite live up to the
expectations you'd hoped. Learn from those and
adjust as you go forward. And also, my other big
advice for a new-time DM: you don't have to
over-prepare one single thing. If you spend so
much time putting out all the details of one small
aspect of the story, what happens if the players
five minutes in go, "We're going to go this way."
"Wh--" Which will happen, because that's part of
the joy of D&D. Part of the rush of being a Game
Master is when that happens. I would recommend,
instead of fleshing out a lot of detail on a small
area, flesh out a fair amount of detail about a
number of them. 'Cause if they do go left, maybe
there's a little tiny thing you put some
afterthought to, and a little development here
that you can then tailor to cover that left turn.
And you'll feel a lot more comfortable having a
loose outline that then you can improvise from on
the fly. Especially if you're really good at
narrative and storytelling, that's great, because
then the ruleset will handle itself and the players
will also work with you on that, and you'll learn
as you go. But if you overprepare one single
thing, you'll end up getting real nervous when
they don't go where you think they will. 'Cause
they won't, 'cause players do that.
(laughter)
MATT: Good luck, that's awesome!
(applause)
MATT: Hello!
GLORIA: Hello! I'm Gloria. I just recently
graduated with a history major and an English
minor--
MATT: Congrats!
(cheering)
GLORIA: If it taught me anything, it's that words
are important and absolutely everything has a
story. So your two signature catch-phrases: "how do
you want to do this?" and "you can certainly
"try!", where did those come from?
MATT: Those came from just playing the game. "You
can certainly try" came out of me not ever wanting
to shut down a player. A player's like-- you're
like, "All of a sudden, you come upon the edge of
"the hallway, and you look, and the cliff just
drops off, there's just an empty expanse." The
player's like, "Well, uh, can I climb down the
rock?" And sometimes, especially if you're a new
DM, you'd be like, "No, you can't, you're going to
fall and die." Which mainly to me shuts off that
creative aspect of the player wanting to think of
creative ways of solving a problem. You instead
can prefer to go, "Well, you can certainly try."
Which makes them go, "Hm. I don't-- why are you
"saying it like that?" But then they still might
want to explore it and be like-- because now
you've given them a hint of an idea that it might
be possible, which then will lead them to explore
more. Like, "Okay, well, I look over the side. How
jagged is the rock in the crevasse below?" And be
like, "Actually, it's fairly smooth in places, but
roll a perception check. Okay, you notice that
"there are a few outcroppings that could probably
be climbed, if you want to try and attempt it."
He's like, "Okay, guys. Who has some ropes?"
Suddenly it went from a "No" to "All right, guys,
"that's not going to work," to "Now we have a
possible plan. How can we as a team come together
"with our skills and equipment and make this work?"
And so, for me, "You can certainly try" is an
invitation to a possibility without shutting down
the player's creativity. And I think part of the
real joy of D&D, especially as a Game Master, is
providing situations where the players can surprise
you with their ingenuity, and themselves
appreciate some of the things that they brought
along or chose with their character class but
don't get to use very often, and find a way to
circumvent a challenge using them. So, to me,
"You can certainly try" is that fine line between
saying, "I mean, you could." And then "How do
you want to do this?" for years, it was just like,
"All right, you got the final kill. Describe the
final kill." And then eventually it got to, "All
"right, you got him, describe it to me. All right,
how do you want to kill them? How do you want to
"do this?" It was just a natural evolution after
years of me running games at home, and then "How
"do you want to do this?" for some reason just had
a nice ring to it, and the players began to
celebrate that phrase. It became its own little
catch-phrase at our home games. I mean, say, "How
"do you want to kill him," it's less of a banner
or... a t-shirt, as--
(laughter)
MATT: So it evolved into that, and then once we
got into "How do you want to do this?" it had
that, "Yes! Okay. Here's what I do: I cut his
throat and grab his hair and tell him, as he
"slowly bleeds out and his eyes go numb, 'Say hi to
your mother for me.'"
(laughter)
MATT: It became that much more of an underlying
invitation for that cinematic moment, so it just
stuck, and then unintentionally passed it on to
all you guys, so I'm a proud papa.
(cheering)
MATT: Thank you.
SARAH: Hello, again.
MATT: Hello, again! Which, by the way, every time
I see your camera it makes me think of the
Predator arm cannon.
SARAH: I know, I love it.
MATT: It's kind of awesome.
SARAH: My name's Sarah. At the autograph signing,
I thanked you. I kind of want to go into a little
bit more detail. I came from one of the satanic
panic families, so my first experience with D&D
was extremely lame, with a rulemonger, and you
have no idea. I can't speak for everybody in the
community, but you have no idea how nice it is to
see a DM who isn't killing the players with the
rules, and to know that my style of DM isn't
actually weird. So thank you very much for that.
MATT: You're welcome.
(applause)
SARAH: My actual question is, can I get a
soundbite of Victor for my phone?
(laughter)
MATT: Let's see. What soundbite do you want? I
don't want to encourage this;
this will end up being
the rest of the panel, guys.
(laughter)
SARAH: You're well within your rights to say no.
MATT: Is that the quote you want?
SARAH: Sure. That's perfect.
MATT: Ready? (Victor voice) You are well
within your rights to say no!
(laughter)
SARAH: Thank you!
(cheering)
MATT: I had to get the spittle in there. It was
part of the process. Sorry, table. And let it be
known, too, that running a really hardcore D&D
game where it is trying to destroy the players,
Dark Souls-level super-hard mode, is totally a fun
and viable way of running the game, too. Just make
sure you communicate that with the players and
everyone understands that's what you're in for.
Because if they don't, and they wanted a different
style of game, that's where it becomes a very
un-fun, frustrating circumstance. But if you're
all down for that type of gameplay? It's actually
really cool. Awesome. Sir, what's your name?
ARTHUR: This is wonderfully weird after seeing you
on the screen for a while. Hi, I'm Arthur.
MATT: Is it any better if I did this?
(laughter)
ARTHUR: Basically, I'd just sit like this the
entire time.
MATT: Not anymore, based on the new set, baby. I
can stand again!
(cheering)
ARTHUR: The power!
MATT: It's overwhelming. (Hearthstone
voice) Power overwhelming. Sorry.
ARTHUR: I just came from a game, actually, and I
have many a complicated new question to ask you,
but because this just happened to me, I have to
ask this. I Taliesined my first game with my other
DM just now, and I want to know, how tired are you
of Taliesin Percying?
MATT: (laughs) His rolls? I can't say I'm tired,
because it makes for really cool moments. If it
was a really lame character that was like, "Well,
yeah, I'm a fighter, and I wander the world for
power because my parents are dead and I want magic
weapons," and then he rolled 20s all the time, I'd
be a little like, "Come on, man, you can't
Gameshark this shit." But Percival's such a cool
character, and it is witchcraft that he rolls as
well as he does.
ARTHUR: He is beating math.
MATT: He is! He's the anti-Wheaton. But nothing
will blow my mind more than Wil Wheaton's stint on
the show. That was... like, mathematicians left
the field after that night. They were like, "Nope.
We're done. Probability has no purpose. We are
rocketing towards the entropic heat death of the
universe. Thank you, Wil Wheaton." So it doesn't
frustrate me. It just means I have to work harder
to kill him. (laughs) Exactly. Or like, "What else
can I do to give him disadvantage all the time?"
ARTHUR: Puns!
MATT: Puns. Puns will work. I can't combat his
puns. Taliesin-- I said this to a few friends last
night. You know the Dos Equis Most Interesting Man
in the World commercials? That should be Taliesin.
He is the most fascinating human being I've ever
known. I've known him for a long time, and he is
just an eclectic, interesting man of all realms of
life experience and strange, occult world
knowledge. He is the closest thing I have to a
modern-day shaman. It's amazing. So yeah. I think
he's earned those 20s when he hits stuff. The
man's probably done enough rituals in his teen
years to make it so.
(laughter)
MATT: Awesome. All right, yeah, so we've got 30
more minutes, guys. We can do this.
MICHAEL: Hi! My name's Michael. You're honestly
one of my idols. Never thought I'd get to talk to
you like this. I was poor two days, didn't think
I'd be able to make it tonight.
MATT: Oh, I'm glad you could make it!
MICHAEL: So two questions. One's a little bit more
on the serious side, the other's just kind of-- I
want to know your opinion on it. First, with all
the satanic panic and all the witch hunts for D&D
back in the day, what really was the driving force
for that? Because I hear a lot of different
conflicting things, you know, Darkest Dungeons,
things like that?
MATT: The driving force for a lot of things like
that are the same reason people are blaming video
games for violence. There are some individuals
that might be causes, but I think whenever youth--
whether it be through untreated mental illness or
parents ignoring a difficulty that someone's going
through in the teenage years, which is a very
difficult time for anybody, as many of us know, or
currently know in the moment. It's not an easy
time. A lot of chemical changes, a lot of physical
changes, a lot of very, very difficult social
structures, in school and outside. It's a very
hard time. And sometimes people do terrible
things. And if a parent isn't paying attention, if
a parent isn't involved, if the parent doesn't
want to take any responsibility for that?
Sometimes they want to look for what else there is
to blame. And so I think a lot of stems from
people that wanted to find other excuses for
unfortunate behavior. They wanted to take
responsibility for the fact that "Maybe I wasn't
there for my child, maybe I didn't inquire or care
why they were lashing out. Maybe I got too busy
with work and didn't want to deal with the stress
of wondering why they were so quiet and not
contacting or communicating, and maybe I need
to really reevaluate if I was being a good parent or
not." Instead: "They were playing D&D! It's D&D's
fault!"
MICHAEL: The wacky tobaccy's Dungeons & Dragons.
My second question: if you had to pick any other
system, not D&D or Pathfinder-based, to run the
players that are in the current group through,
what would you pick? Out of all the systems out
there, what was your favorite preferred kind of
system?
MATT: To introduce somebody?
MICHAEL: Little bit of column A, little bit of
column B. Is introducing someone something you
just enjoy doing?
MATT: Both. I mean, I really like 5th Edition. I
think of all the D&D editions, it's the easiest to
understand, comparably. I look at my 2nd Edition,
THAC0, no thank you. Trying to introduce stats to
kids nowadays is going to be a rough one. It has a
place in my heart, but esoteric math is a
difficult thing to introduce to new people. For
those who don't know THAC0, look it up. But I
think that 5th Edition is good way of weaving
narrative and roleplaying context into combat
rules without them being two separate parts of the
system. Advantage and disadvantage works both
skill checks and combat. Abilities that can affect
one sometimes affect the other. It's
simplified and streamlined to the point where it's
not quite as intimidating for people who have no
roleplaying game experience. If they're really
new, Dungeon World is an even simpler system
that's been really good that helps bring people
into it and give them the idea of roleplaying
without having even as complicated a ruleset as
D&D 5th Edition has. I think the Fate Core system
is actually really, really good, too. It has a
good scaling system for success and failure. Those
are all really good places to look, in my opinion.
I like them all. I enjoy them all. Yay! You're
welcome. Hello!
NATHAN: Hey! So I was wondering. As a DM, do you
ever just get really, really mad at your players,
and how do you deal with that? Do you maybe make a
really, really hard encounter? How do you reward
them if they actually come above that?
MATT: Do you mean angry about how good they're
doing in the game, or angry at them personally for
what they're doing?
NATHAN: Maybe a little bit of both.
MATT: Okay. (laughs) Sometimes. Human beings will
have conflict, and even when you're friends there
will be moments of tension, in a game environment
or outside of it. It's unavoidable. There's always
going to be dissonance occasionally between human
beings, no matter how much you care about each
other. I've had many games in the past, before
Critical Role, where certain players were either
having a bad day and lashing out at the
group, or a new player to a game didn't jive
with the rest of the way we wanted to play the
game, and instead was taking over and ruining the
experience for other people for their own power
trip, and in a lot of those circumstances, you
have to take the player aside and talk to
them, and let them know. The moment it starts
getting weird, be like, "All right, guys, let's
take a quick break. Bathroom, get snacks. Hey,
let's talk for a second." And take them aside
and be like, "Hey, I'm feeling this weird
tension," or, "The way you're playing-- is
everything okay?" Don't be afraid to engage and
ask what might be the reason for that going on.
And sometimes they might be like, "Actually, yeah,
my girlfriend just broke up with me," or "I just
found out that a friend of mine is sick." Or they
could be like, "No, man, I don't want to talk
about feelings, whatever." Then maybe they don't
belong at your game table. (laughs) But having a
conversation and just opening up that much might
help them feel better and work through whatever
they're going through at the table, or help you
realize that they need to find a game group that's
more their speed. Just because everyone shows up
at the table doesn't mean you're all forced to
play together. It's better to divide if you're not
jiving and both find game groups that work for you
than to try and make it work in spite of it.
So that conversation helps a lot. I've had players
that got really, really drunk at games, and ended
up disrupting it, after repeatedly asking them not
to do that, and then eventually had to tell them,
"Sorry, can't play anymore,. You're not respecting
the time and energy we're all putting into this to
schedule it, and the time I'm putting in to
prepare for it," and they were like, "Okay, I get
it." Usually when it gets really bad they'll
understand that. It's not an easy thing, and it
does happen occasionally, but being forthright
and being open, asking about it and seeing
what you can do to come to a compromise,
and if there isn't a way to do so, you think, then
just go your separate ways. That's my
recommendation. Thank you!
COLIN: Hi, I'm Colin.
MATT: What's your name, sorry?
COLIN: Colin.
MATT: Colin. And by the way, I didn't get your
name. What's your name? Nathan! There you go.
Thank you, Nathan. Hi, Colin.
COLIN: So whether it's from someone who influenced
you in your life or your own thoughts, what was
your biggest "A-ha!" or epiphany moment in regards
to how you think about DMing or how you act as a DM?
MATT: That's a good question. Huh. I think-- oh
man, that's a really interesting question. I
hadn't really thought about that specifically. I
would say that a lot of it is learning from other
friends I've played with. Things that I really
liked about their games. My friends like Jason
Bender and Sean Manzano, who I used to play games
with back in the mid-2000s, they were-- Jason was
a game designer, Sean worked in QA, and they were
both not the kind of people who necessarily had a
theatrical flair, you would expect, but when they
got to the table, they were so invested in their
story that they still managed to show glimmers of
this great narrative flair to the way they would
tell the story, and I really enjoyed that. They
reflected what I wanted out of my games. And I was
getting heavily into community theater and improv,
I loved the idea of storytelling and then asking
others to return it, and so at the same time that
I was enjoying these games with my friends that
they were running, and games that I was running
for them, I was also honing my skills specifically
in that field of inviting others to add to a
narrative, and to describe verbally scenes to get
an audience's attention, and so those skills
came together at the same time, when I found
it was hard to get people to engage in D&D,
especially actors and performers. That was another
thing, too, was that as the years went on, a lot
of my friends ended up becoming actors that I was
trying to get into D&D. A lot of conversations--
which I'm sure many of you are familiar with,
where someone will bring it up at a party or a
get-together and be like, "I never-- you play
Dungeons and Dragons? How does that work?" And I'm
always like, "Oh, that's an invitation to suck you
in, my friend." So I began to drag friends
into it, and ask people, "Well, if you're not busy
next Friday, come over. I'll run a one-shot for
you guys. First one's free!"
(laughter)
MATT: And so that, I think, had a lot of influence
on me learning it over time. As far as
specific people, bookwriters like Neil Gaiman and
his incredible, intricate character narrative
and setting a scene and unique spins on existing
lore and mythology. As far as combat sequences? A
lot of anime. What am I going to say? The Exalted
RPG is basically just Anime: the RPG, and that was
fun for a while, too. I don't know of any
specific people, because when I was learning to
DM, there wasn't other figures that DMed
publically. There wasn't a Chris Perkins that I
could look at and be like, "Master, teach me." So
we were all learning in a vacuum. So it
was a combination of skills that I was learning at
the time and learning what I liked from other
people I'd played with and over time
fine-tuning what I really got enjoyment out of,
and was able to extract from the players. Thank
you! Hope that answered it somewhat.
TAYLOR: Hi, I'm Taylor, and my friends and I, who
I play with, we're a big fan of you and we get our
groups together partially in idolization of you,
but we go from coast to coast, all at college, we
get on Skype and we play for six hours a day,
somehow managing to get all across the time zones.
We do a lot of sci-fi RPGs, so I wanted to ask:
what's your favorite sci-fi system?
MATT: Oh, man. I really enjoy Traveler.
TAYLOR: I'm doing that right now.
MATT: Good, good! It's a great system! One of the
few systems where you can die in character creation.
(laughter)
MATT: Because it's cool. As you create your
character, you basically work out their arc of how
they grew up and how they developed, so you can be
like, "Well, I can play that plucky young
20-something who's new and trying to make his name
in the world," and that's cool, so you can start
as a Mercenary, you're a 20-something Mercenary.
So you get the skills of a 20-year-old Mercenary.
"But if I want to be a more hardened criminal in
his late 40s," then you can go from that
Mercenary, but once that work led him into a
darker field, then he began to break the law and
do more criminal smuggling, so now you go for the
Smuggler set, which adds more skill bonuses to
you, but you're a little older, so you get some
penalties for age, some benefits to your wisdom
for age, and you're like, "Cool, 45. But if I take
him to a 55-year-old drug lord who's run from the
smuggling ring-- Okay, let me roll randomly.
Aww, he got killed in a firefight."
(laughter)
MATT: "We'll start the run again." That's a
possibility in the system! So it's like,
do you want to risk pushing the envelope a bit
with that dangerous lifestyle for those extra
little skill bonuses? And I love that aspect of
it. But that's a really, really cool system that
very much plays into that pseudo-Star Wars,
more Firefly-esque-type universe.
Little Space Balls-ish, if you want to. Yeah,
Traveler's fun. Diaspora's fun. Diaspora's a good
system. I ran a game-- didn't run a game, I played
in a game for a while that was run by a guy named
Philip. He was the writer of the movie Event
Horizon. So he ran a pretty good sci-fi/horror game.
(laughter)
MATT: Guy had some issues in the best way. If you
haven't seen Event Horizon, well, don't eat before
you do. Yeah, so those are great sci-fi games. I
haven't had a lot of experience with a lot of the
more recent ones, because I've been stuck in D&D
world for a long time, because that's where
my heart is, but those two I enjoy a lot,
tremendously. And actually, I hear a lot of good
things about the new Star Wars RPG.
(cheering)
MATT: Most recent one. There was a Fate version
for a while that I heard was really good.
TAYLOR: I played Edge of the Empire.
MATT: Right, that was good, too. I haven't played
it yet, haven't had the opportunity. I know a
couple friends who've been threatening to one day
run that for me, and I'm like, "Sure. In my
copious free time. Let me finish the campaign
guide first." So thank you very much. Hello!
TRUSTIN: Hi. I'm Trustin.
MATT: Hi, Justin.
TRUSTIN: Trustin.
MATT: I trust in you.
(laughter)
MATT: I'm sorry, that came out so-- I knew it as
it was happening, it was awful, my sincere apology.
TRUSTIN: It's okay. It's just every day in my
life. Okay, so I actually started D&D only a
couple months ago with my brother. He's DMing,
he's back there somewhere.
MATT: Oh, yes!
TRUSTIN: So. I have two questions. First one is
just: I'm trying to make this character that's a
super destruction-happy, fun-fun, kill-kill type of
character, very much based off of Jinx or Harley Quinn.
MATT: Okay, yeah, yeah.
TRUSTIN: Just take some joy in causing as much
panic and fear and stuff. I was wondering what
sort of class you might recommend for that?
MATT: Oh, man. Well, talk to your group. Make sure
that they know the kind of character you're making
so that you don't end up bringing that to the
table with a lawful good paladin. Because that
might be a very short campaign, for you or them.
TRUSTIN: I don't know, I feel like it could be
fun.
MATT: It could be interesting. Just be aware, it
might be a very short, fun campaign. But if you're
all playing sort of a Suicide Squad-type,
whatever-it-takes-to-get-the-job-done group, then
it can be a lot of fun and rampant destruction.
And in that case, I mean, barbarian, man. You're
just an engine of up-front destruction. Yes!
(laughs) It's a class designed to be like,
"Oh, that? I want to kill it. I want to kill it in
the face with my face."
(laughter)
MATT: So barbarian's great, but then you get
multiclass into some other elements, like
barbarian with some fighter classes for action
surge, as you've seen with Grog, is disgusting.
Barbarian-- or if you like to tear things together
as a beast, you can take druid with a couple
levels of barbarian, so you can rage and then
beast shape.
(cheering)
MATT: So you're like, "Oh, I'm sorry, you think
this creature's scary, this giant sabretoothed
cat? How about if it takes half damage?"
(laughter)
MATT: But if you want-- I mean, then you also have
wizard if you want to just tear things apart, or
warlock's fun, too. Warlock's a great option if
you want to be more like crazy orchestrator of
death to everything around you. "And you're dead!
Hahaha! And your house is on fire! And I summon a
demon beast to devour your family! (cackles)" Also
fun. So for what you're describing, I think good
fits would be barbarian or warlock as a base, most
definitely.
TRUSTIN: All right. The second question is
on my brother's absolute insistence.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: No, you don't need to, never
mind.
TRUSTIN: No, I'll do it anyway, because you forced
me to!
(laughter)
MATT: Go on.
TRUSTIN: He just wanted you to say, "Fuck you,
Ryuji," in Yusuke's voice.
MATT: Say what in what?
TRUSTIN: "Fuck you, Ryuji," in Yusuke's voice.
MATT: (Yusuke voice) Fuck you, Ryuji.
(laughter, applause)
MATT: (Yusuke voice) Doesn't seem to like any of
the art that I make. What a bastard.
(laughter)
JARED: My liege, it's an honor to be in your
presence.
MATT: You may rise.
JARED: Thank you. Hi, I'm Jared. So I'm a panelist
and I'm a newly DM of seven months. I have ran a
couple campaigns, my first one being an evil
campaign, actually. It got pretty weird.
MATT: They usually do. It's okay.
JARED: I mean sex dungeon weird.
MATT: Okay, it doesn't usually go that way. In my
experience.
JARED: There's a point to it, too. There's a point
to it. Didn't interact with it, but more like one
of the characters, who was a tiefling chaotic evil
character, was not making perception checks at
all, so I used it to where, when he turned around,
all of it disappeared and a huge hole appeared, a
big massive monster. So yeah. Also, yeah.
MATT: Go on.
(laughter)
JARED: So what I want to say to you about my
campaigns-- also, I've played a lot of characters.
I played a character named Kyo who was a druid
half-elf mini-[inaudible]. Looked a lot like a
[inaudible]. I currently play a halfling rogue
thief with a criminal background who I dumped all
my points in dexterity, and stealth and sleight of
hand's at plus five. So he can't not be stealthy.
But my question, my question, okay. So since I've
watched a lot of your DM Tips, which is why I got
a Dungeon Master's Guide, hardcover, for fifty
bucks. I want to know, how was your campaigns--
how were they like when you first started, and
what brought you to forming it into Critical Role?
MATT: My very first campaigns, when I was high
school, were me, my cousin Steve, who was an elven
thief mage named Natibe Kurios, who eventually
became an NPC in future games, my friend Ian, who
was my buff Korean friend who just wanted to pick
a fighter that could grandmaster duel longswords
and kill stuff. He was the epitome of a min-maxer,
but in a loving way. And then my friend Todd, who
found an archer kit that completely broke 2nd
Edition, where he'd shoot seven arrows a
round. I remember there was an encounter
where they accidentally entered the lair of an
ancient blue dragon, and it was asleep, and all of
a sudden they roused it and it began to wake up,
and I described as its eye opened, and he goes, "I
attack it!" And he killed it in one round, and it
went like, (groans). And I went, "All right. Your
character's broken, buddy." So yeah. They were
pretty rough and silly and randomly rolling-- we
were learning by trying things out and
failing miserably, so. And what got me to Critical
Role? Felicia Day asking if we wanted to stream
it, and us going, "Eh, I don't know," and she's
like, "But Twitch!" and I'm like, "Okay." So
that's basically it.
JARED: Also, I almost tricked my DM into giving me
the Deck of Many Things.
MATT: Don't ever trick your-- why would you do
that?!
(laughter)
JARED: I love fucking with my party.
MATT: Understood. Does your party like it?
(laughter)
MATT: Okay. As long as they're okay with it, it's
fine. (laughs) Thank you very much. Hello!
ALEXIS: Hi, my name is Alexis.
MATT: Hi, Alexis. You look amazing, by the way.
That's an awesome outfit.
ALEXIS: Thank you! I also want to say, it's
amazing to see you again. I got to meet you two
years ago at Colossalcon.
MATT: Awesome! Oh, Colossalcon. By the way, guys,
if you haven't been to Colossalcon, it's got a
pool inside and a swim-up bar. Come on. It's fun.
It's good to see you again.
ALEXIS: I actually had a friend want me to ask you
a question, so I'm doing that for him. He wanted to
know: what class did you first start out, and did you
start favoring a specific race for making characters?
MATT: My first character ever was a human wizard
named Trent. Emeritus Trent, which is actually-- I
took the name from the Xanth book series by Piers
Anthony, and I was like, "I want to be a wizard
that uses a sword, get up in the fray!" Because I
didn't know what the hell I was doing. So I used a
militant wizard kit in 2nd Edition, which
basically was the worst wizard kit ever. It
basically was like, "You get no benefits, except
you can use a sword, so now you're a wizard who
gets up in front and killed."
(laughter)
MATT: Which happened. So yeah, no. That was my
first character. It was really bad. As far as
races I tend to favor while creating characters,
there's a glut of elves. Don't get me wrong, I
like myself some elves, but everyone's like, "I
want to be an elf!" I want to be a dwarf. I love
dwarves. Dwarves and halflings get
underrepresented, I believe. So those are my two
favorite races and probably the two that I'd play
if I got to create another character. Definitely.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I'm a halfling rogue!
MATT: Yeah! Represent! Halfling!
(cheering)
MATT: That happened. Thank you very much. Good to
see you again.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: What about Volo's?
MATT: What's that? Volo's is great! Yeah,
monstrous races? Go for it! Heck yeah! Aarakocra,
man. Nothing a DM loves more than a player who can
fly at low level.
(laughter)
MATT: It's great. All right, guys, unfortunately
we're running really low on time, here. I'm going
to try and get through some rapid-fire questions.
So quick questions, quick answers, and if I don't
get to your questions, I sincerely apologize in
advance. See if you can bring them-- I have
another panel tomorrow, I know it's not
D&D-related, but I won't argue if any D&D
questions slip in there. Sir.
JACK: Okay. Hi, I'm Jack. First off, thank you for
blessing my dice earlier. As a new DM, I will try
to use my powers for good. No promises.
MATT: That's like any DM should.
JACK: First off, as I leave, I'd like to show you
a very quick picture related to the goldfish. So.
I think you'll enjoy it. That'll be as I leave. My
question is, what was the first event after you
started Twitch, what was that moment where you sat
back and realized, "Oh. This is actually a thing
that is big and has followers?"
MATT: I think when we began to get mass donations
to charity, to 826LA, when we began to get $100
donations, $200 donations, I was like, people are
legitimately excited about supporting these
charitable causes in the name of playing
roleplaying games. It was amazing. And then people
were asking us to make merch, make merch. "I don't
know what that is! We'll just make 100 t-shirts
and see if you want to buy them. Hey, guys! So we
put a couple t-shirts up there if you want to--
they're sold out? What?"
(laughter)
MATT: That was when it really hit home, when we
were like, "What is going on?" Thank you, good
question. You look amazing! Oh, that's an amazing
picture. Got to finish line? Okay, trying to move
fast, trying to finish the line, guys. All right,
cool.
JADE: My name is Jade. I'm writing my own campaign
setting, and I wanted to know, based on your own
experience running and writing the guide, what's
the most unusual or unexpected thing that you've
had to create that really makes the world seem
living?
MATT: Oh, that's an interesting question.
Honestly, fleshing out factions-- and not just
racial and city-based factions, but fleshing out
secret, small factions, trying to think of what
things the players might never encounter. Thinking
about what individuals might work behind the
scenes of certain areas. And considering that maybe--
this was actually pretty fun-- considering that
not every major town in a fantasy setting is just
the races in the book. Because sometimes, not all
gnolls might be evil. Not all orcs are marauding
killers. You can consider that a lot of creatures,
based on their life experience and things, can
still engage and move into different elements of
society. So whereas in this campaign, that I'm
running with our players, it's largely the classic
races they've encountered, they've also not been
to a lot of cities across Tal'Dorei in which there
is a little more of a robust come-one-come-all
type of environment. So that was a unique thing to
develop, definitely. You look awesome!
JACKSON: Get the mic to a place where I can
actually talk. Hi. I'm Jackson. I'm one of the DMs
from Dungeon Crawl Gaming, and I've made a Legend
of Zelda-themed campaign, and to do that I had to
rewrite the entire Races section of the Player's
Handbook, because there aren't orcs in Hyrule, but
one of the things that I found very challenging
was to incorporate how a goron rolls. And so what
I was thinking, have there ever been things from a
video game or from media that work really well in
that, and you've tried to translate to D&D and it
didn't quite work? What did you do in those scenarios?
MATT: I mean, there are elements of what
eventually became the blood hunter that stemmed
from inspiration of the classic witch hunter classes
and the Witcher game that are like, "Cool, if I
can make something like that in here," and then
as I begin to try and print it out, it was hard to
tailor the rules, and I decided to make it
something wholly new and my own. So that
particularly was hard. Back in the day,
I remember very early in my D&D career,
helping my friend make Ryu as a D&D character,
because he really wanted to play Ryu in D&D.
We were so dumb.
(laughter)
MATT: And it was so broken and stupid, and after a
game we went, "No, that was-- no. No Ryu in D&D.
Sorry, man." So yeah. That happens. (laughs) Thank
you.
[elevator music]